.Dd $Mdocdate: November 27 2020 $
.Dt EXCISION 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm excision
.Nd configure and control the Excision Mail system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm add-alias
.Ar alias@domainA.tldA user@domainB.tldB
.Nm
.Cm add-user
.Ar user@domain.tld
.Op Ar 1
.Nm
.Cm add-user-key |
.Cm change-passwd |
.Cm deleteall-user-keys
.Ar user@domain.tld
.Nm
.Cm daily-report |
.Cm ensure-dkim |
.Cm ensure-gpg |
.Cm fix-perms |
.Cm renew-certs |
.Cm show-stats |
.Cm userdb-check |
.Cm virtual-regen
.Nm
.Cm ensure-zone
.Op Ar domain.tld
.Nm
.Cm whitelist-bigmailer
.Ar domain.tld
.Nm
.Cm whitelist-friend
.Ar IP
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility is the configuration manager for the Excision Mail system.
It can be used to manage the
.Sx USERS ,
encryption
.Sx KEYS
and
.Sx DNS
settings.
.Pp
Throughout this document, it is assumed that the
.Ar sub-addr-delim
character is set to
.Ql + .
.Pp
The following commands are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Cm add-alias Ar alias@domainA.tldA user@domainB.tldB
.Pp
Add
.Ar alias@domainA.tldA
as an alias for
.Ar user@domainB.tldB .
.Pp
This allows
.Ar user@domainB.tldB
to send and receive mails as
.Ar alias[+ext]@domainA.tldA .
Being added as an alias now disqualifes
.Ar alias@domainA.tldA
from being a regular user.
No regular user account can be set as an alias.
.Pp
See
.Sx USERS
for details about account types.
.Pp
.It Cm add-user Ar user@domain.tld Op Ar 1
.Pp
Add
.Ar user@domain.tld
as a regular user, with optionally asking for an openssh
key, if the second argument is specified and is
.Ql 1 .
.Pp
An openssh key is needed if
.Ar user@domain.tld
wishes to have password changing permissions for their
own account.
.Pp
.It Cm add-user-key Ar user@domain.tld
.Pp
Prompt for adding an openssh key for
.Ar user@domain.tld .
.Pp
A user can have multiple openssh keys.
.Pp
.It Cm change-passwd Ar user@domain.tld
.Pp
Change the IMAP, POP and SMTP password for
.Ar user@domain.tld .
This takes effect immediately.
.Pp
.It Cm daily-report
.Pp
Run the daily report and update script manually.
.Pp
.It Cm deleteall-user-keys Ar user@domain.tld
.Pp
Remove all openssh keys for
.Ar user@domain.tld .
.Pp
This will disable the
.Ar user@domain.tld
account from being able to change their password.
.Pp
.It Cm ensure-dkim
.Pp
Ensure that the DKIM certificates for all domains are valid.
.Pp
.It Cm ensure-gpg
.Pp
Ensure minimal sanity of the GPG system to allow users
to use
.Xr gpg-wks-server 1 .
.Pp
.It Cm ensure-zone Op Ar domain.tld
.Pp
Create the
.Sy zonefile
for
.Ar domain.tld
in
.Pa /var/nsd/zones/master/domain.tld.tmp .
If no
.Ar domain.tld
is specified, it defaults to the main domain for the server.
.Pp
This does not activate the new
.Sy zonefile .
The system admin should check the generated
.Sy zonefile
and then run
.Bd -literal -offset width
$ mv /var/nsd/zones/master/domain.tld{.tmp,}
$ rcctl restart nsd
.Ed
.Pp
.It Cm fix-perms
Do a minimal fix of permissions of all files related to Excision Mail.
.Pp
.It Cm renew-certs
.Pp
Renew
.Xr acme-client 1
certificates for all domains and reload the services if needed.
.Pp
.It Cm show-stats
.Pp
Show email statistics from
.Xr dovecot 1 ,
.Xr rspamd 8
and
.Xr smtpd 8 .
.Pp
.It Cm userdb-check
.Pp
Validate the current users and aliases, and check for inconsistencies.
.Pp
.It Cm virtual-regen
.Pp
Regenerate the user database and reload the services.
.Pp
.Sy NOTE :
This does not validate the user database prior to regenerating it.
The sytem admin must run
.Cm userdb-check
before running this command.
.Pp
.It Cm whitelist-bigmailer Ar domain.tld
.Pp
Allow all MX IP addresses for
.Ar domain.tld
to bypass the
.Xr spamd 8
greylisting.
.Pp
.It Cm whitelist-friend Ar IP
.Pp
Allow the
.Ar IP
address to bypass the
.Xr spamd 8
greylisting.
.El
.Sh USERS
There are two types of user accounts in Excision Mail:
.Sy regular
and
.Sy alias .
.Pp
.Sy regular
accounts can be added using the
.Cm add-user
command.
The accounts are used for authentication in
IMAP, POP and SMTP protocols.
They are given passwords and
optionally openssh key based password changing authority.
.Pp
.Sy alias
accounts can be added using the
.Cm add-alias
command.
These accounts cannot be used for IMAP, POP or SMTP logins.
.Pp
Both account types are functionally equivalent for sending and
receiving emails, allowing use with delimiter extensions
.Ar user[+ext]@domain.tld
and using
.Xr gpg-wks-server 1
for
.Xr gpg 1
key publication.
.Pp
They are indistinguishable from an outside perspective and are
present as a simple way to create multiple identities.
.Pp
Once an alias is created it is advised to not remove the alias,
manually or otherwise, unless special care has been taken to sanitize
the ecosystem.
This can create unintended consequences, such as
free floating GPG keys, not tied to any account; emails
being sent to the incorrect person.
There is no way to advertise that an account has been removed.
.Sh KEYS
There are several key types associated with Excision Mail:
DKIM certificates,
.Xr acme-client 1
.Xr ssl 8
certificates,
.Xr ssh 1
user keys and
.Xr gpg 1
user keys.
.Pp
The DKIM certificates are auto-managed using the
.Cm ensure-dkim
command.
.Pp
The
.Xr ssl 8
certificates for IMAP, POP and SMTP are managed using the
.Cm renew-certs
command.
It is run in the
.Cm daily-report
to ensure that all
.Xr ssl 8
certificates are up to date.
.Pp
The
.Xr ssh 1
keys are only available to designated users,
who have had an ssh key added during the account
creation with
.Cm add-user Ar 1 ,
or with
.Cm add-user-key .
An ssh key is needed for allowing the user to
change their password.
For a user to change their password, they need to ssh to the
mail server with the
.Sy excision-passwd
user and the ssh key registered to their account.
.Bd -literal -offset width
$ ssh -i identity_file excison-passwd@mail.domain.tld
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Xr gpg 1
keys for the system accounts
.Ar wks@domain.tld
are auto-managed using the
.Cm ensure-gpg
command.
Users can manage their published keys using the
.Xr gpg-wks-server 1
key publication protocol.
.Sh DNS
The DNS management subsystem is an optional system using
.Xr nsd 8 .
.Pp
All domains registered in Excision Mail have their zonefiles
generated using
.Cm ensure-zone .
Even if the DNS subsystem is not used, the zone files
are generated as a reference for manually managing the DNS.
The temporary zone files are created and stored in
.Pa /var/nsd/zones/master/domain.tld.tmp .
If the DNS subsystem was not enabled during install time,
it can be enabled by simply enabling
.Xr nsd 8 :
.Bd -literal -offset width
$ rcctl enable nsd
$ rcctl start nsd
.Ed
.Pp
Extra zone information for
.Ar domain.tld
can be added by putting it in
.Pa /etc/excision/nsd/domain.tld.zone.addon .
This information is appended to the zonefile when
it is created with
.Cm ensure-zone .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dovecot 1 ,
.Xr gpg 1 ,
.Xr gpg-wks-server 1 ,
.Xr smtpd.conf 5 ,
.Xr rspamd 8 ,
.Xr smtpd 8
.Pp
Extended online documentation is available at
.Lk https://excision.bsd.ac .
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
is written by
.An Aisha Tammy Aq Mt excision@bsd.ac
with the help of other open source contributors at
.Lk https://github.com/Excision-Mail/Excision-Mail .
